---
title: 'An impossibility result in resource allocation'
date: 2020-12-31
permalink: /posts/2012/08/dictatorship_in_linear_exchange_economy/
tags:
  - Theoretical Economics
---


Mechanism design has always been a great interest of mine, and I studied several problems when I was beginning out research. One problem I worked on was fair resource allocation, and I found an impossibility result: **given a set of divisible, substitute items, any efficient and strategy-proof allocation mechanism must be dictorial, when there are 2 agents**. Several monthes later I would have found out that the problem was already studied by the economics community and the impossibility result was already known. Nevertheless, the proof I found is conceptually much simpler, and yields some new insights to the problem. 

Background
=============

In **game theory**, we study the strategic behaviors of (selfish) agents in decision-making systems. Perhaps a well-known example is the rock-paper-scissors game: what strategy should each agent adapt to maximize their chances of winning? Another example is the **prisoner's dilemma**. Two criminals are captured and interrogated, and each has the option to stay silent or betray his partner: if both stay silent, they spend 1 year in prison (since the law enforcement has no sufficient evidence); if both betrays, they spend 4 years in prison (the law enforcment would have sufficient evidence); if one betrays and the other stays silend, the one who stayed silent gets 6 years in prison, while the one who betrayed walks out clean. An unfamiliar reader may think about the best strategy for each criminal in the prisoner's dilemma. 

**Mechanism design** is a subfield of game theory, and it is sometimes called 'reverse game theory'. In game theory, there is a fixed rule as how payoff are generated for different possible actions of agents(when two players show their hand in rock-paper-scissors, it is clear who won). In mechanism design, we aim to design such rules, in order to elicit desirable behaviors from rational decision makers. 

Let's assume there is a set of resources that we wish to allocate among 2 agents. But the 2 agents have different **private** valuation for each item, and we ask the agents to report their valuation for each item. As an example, think of a CEO deciding how to allocate resources between two branches. A natural idea would be to give each item to the agent that values it the most, but we immediately see the problem with this: agents will just report arbitrarily high valuations, in order to secure the resources to themselves. This brings to a very desirable and important property that we wish to elicit from agents: **truthfulness**. Namely, can we design an allocation rule, such that the payoff enjoyed by each agent can be maximized when they are reporting truthfully their valuations? The answer is yes, and we can quite easily design such a allocation rule: assuming items are divisible, give half of everything to the 1st agent, and half of everything to the 2nd agent, regardless of the reported valuations. However, such a rule may not be 'optimal': suppose agent A values the 1st item more and agent B values the 2nd item more, then by giving agent A the 1st item and B the 2nd item increases both agent's payoff. We call such sub-optimal allocations **inefficient**. A natural question to ask is: **does there exists an allocation rule, such that it is both strategyproof and efficient**? 


Mechanism for the Linear Exchange Economy
=============
The resource allocation problem we just described has been extensively studied in the economics community, and falls under the general model termed '**exchange economy**'. In the current setting, we will assume there is a set of $m$ divisible items and 2 agents $A$ and $B$. Each agent has a private valuation for each item. Denote $v_{Ai}$ the private valuation of agent $A$ for item $i$, and similar for $v_{Bi}$. Furthur, the **utility** of each agent is the linear sum of items they received. Formally, suppose agent $A$ received a $f_{i}$ fraction of item $i$, then her utility is
$$u= \sum_{i} f_{i} v_{Ai}$$. 

In general, we will consider utility as a function of the valuations and the items received. Let $v$ be a valuation and $f = (f_1, ..., f_m)$ be denote the fraction of each item received by some agent. Then the utility evaluated with $v$ is:

$$u(v, f) = \sum_i f_i v_i$$

Our goal is to design an **allocation rule**, in other words, a function of the reported valuations that decides how to allocate items between the 2 agents. As we have seen, if we are not careful with our rule, agents might have an incentive to lie about their true preferences. Denote $v'_{Ai}$ the valuation reported by agent $A$. Further, let $F$ be our mechanism:

$$F_A(v'_A, v'_B) = (f_{A1}, ..., f_{Am})$$

$$F_B(v'_A, v'_B) = (f_{B1}, ..., f_{Bm})$$

where 

$$F_A + F_B = 1$$

We formally define the notion of strategyproof-ness. 

**Definition:** A mechanism $F$ is called strategyproof if

$$\begin{align*}
\forall v_A, v_B, v'_A, v'_B:& u(v_A, F(v_A, v_B)) \ge u(v_A, F(v'_A, v_B))\\
&u(v_B, F(v_A, v_B)) \ge u(v_B, F(v'_A, v'_B))
\end{align*}$$

We have also introduced the notion of efficiency. Formally, an allocation is efficient if there exists no other allocation, such that every agent gets strictly better off. 

**Definition:** A mechanism $F$ is called efficient if there exists no other allocation $f'$, such that for all $v_A, v_B$: 

$$\begin{align*}
u(v_A, F(v_A, v_B)) \ge u(v_A, f')\\
u(v_B, F(v_A, v_B)) \ge u(v_B, 1 - f')
\end{align*}$$

and at least 1 of the inequalities is strict. 

Conclusion
============
In this post we have introduced the problem of allocating resources among 2 agents with linear preferences. In the next post I will give a proof of the dictatorship result: any efficient and strategyproof mechanism must be dictorial. 